Clarify error & fallback handling (#879)
unicode-org/message-format-wg: spec/formatting.md

To start, we presume that a _message_ has either been parsed from its syntax
or created from a data model description.
If the resulting _message_ is not _well-formed_, a _Syntax Error_ is emitted.
If the resulting _message_ is _well-formed_ but is not _valid_, a _Data Model Error_ is emitted.

> The formatting of a _message_ is defined by the following operations,
> starting with _Pattern Selection_:

Author: ```suggestion
The formatting of a _message_ is defined by the following operations:
```

- **_<dfn>Pattern Selection</dfn>_** determines which of a message's _patterns_ is formatted.
  For a message with no _selectors_, this is simple as there is only one _pattern_.
  With _selectors_, this will depend on their resolution.

> - **_<dfn>Formatting</dfn>_** takes the resolved values of the selected _pattern_,

Reviewer: Are _Formatting_ and _Expression and Markup Resolution_ out of order? I think one would need to do the resolution bits before performing the "formatting". The introductory text on line 13 suggests that this is an ordered list of operations, so maybe flip-flop the two?

Author: The way I would put it, _Expression and Markup Resolution_ is a dependency for both _Pattern Selection_ and _Formatting_, hence putting them in this order here.

As a separate note, it might be a good idea to move the Pattern Selection examples somewhere else; they're pretty voluminous.

Reviewer: Maybe restore line 13 then? More like

> The formatting of a _message_ includes these operations:

  The resolution of _text_ is rather straightforward,
  and is detailed under _literal resolution_.

Implementations are not required to expose
the _expression resolution_ and _pattern selection_ operations to their users,
or even use them in their internal processing,
as long as the final _formatting_ result is made available to users
and the observable behavior of the _formatting_ matches that described here.

> _Attributes_ MUST NOT have any effect on the formatted output of a _message_,
> or be made available to function implementations.

Author: As suggested by @macchiati in https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/879#discussion_r1749510245, but with lower-case "nor" as it's not an RFC 2119 term:
```suggestion
_Attributes_ MUST NOT have any effect on the formatted output of a _message_,
nor be made available to function implementations.
```

  The resolution of _text_ is rather straightforward,
  and is detailed under _literal resolution_.

> Formatter implementations are not required to expose

Reviewer: Too specific?

```suggestion
Implementations are not required to expose
```

Author: Sure; this paragraph was not actually modified, it just gets highlighted that way due to moving the note lower down.

the _expression resolution_ and _pattern selection_ operations to their users,
or even use them in their internal processing,
as long as the final _formatting_ result is made available to users

> and the observable behavior of the formatter matches that described here.

Reviewer: Consistent with the above comment...

```suggestion
and the observable behavior of the formatting matches that described here.
```

> _Attributes_ MUST NOT affect the processing or output of a _message_.

Reviewer: This is too strong, since "processing" might reasonably include that used in translation, which is the whole point of attributes. Perhaps this is closer to what is intended:

```suggestion
_Attributes_ MUST NOT affect the _pattern selection_, _expression resolution_, or _formatting_ of a _message_.
```

Author: We discussed this previously in https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/845#discussion_r1697081284, but that wasn't conclusive before that PR was merged.

I'd still prefer my suggestion from https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/845#discussion_r1697159755:
```suggestion
_Attributes_ MUST NOT have any effect on the formatted output of a _message_,
or be made available to function implementations.
```

That ought to have the same effect, while not requiring us to enumerate all the parts of this document.

Would that work?

Reviewer: I think so. Do we need to mention markup in addition to function implementation?

Author: No, because markup processing can't be customized within MF2, and therefore it's covered by "any effect on the formatted output".

Reviewer 2: > +_Attributes_ MUST NOT have any effect on the formatted output of a _message_,
> +or be made available to function implementations.

This is slightly ambiguous. If you mean:

Attributes_ MUST NOT have any effect on the formatted output of a _message_,
AND
Attributes_ MUST NOT be made available to function implementations.

Then it would be better to say:
> +_Attributes_ MUST NOT have any effect on the formatted output of a _message_,
> +NOR be made available to function implementations.

and its value is looked up from the _formatting context_ _input mapping_.

> The resolution of a _variable_ MAY fail if no value is identified for its _name_.

Reviewer: This is the one that is wrong. The "MAY" here is incorrectly normative.

```suggestion
The resolution of a _variable_ fails if no value is identified for its _name_.
```

## Pattern Selection

> At the start of _pattern selection_,
> if the _message_ contains any _reserved statements_,

Reviewer: Simplify?

```suggestion
If the _message_ contains any _reserved statements_,
```

emit an _Unsupported Statement_ error.

If the _message_ being formatted is not _well-formed_ and _valid_,
the result of pattern selection is a _pattern_ consisting of a single _fallback value_
using the _message_'s fallback string defined in the _formatting context_
or if this is not available or empty, the U+FFFD REPLACEMENT CHARACTER `�`.

> If the _message_ being formatted does not contain a _matcher_,
> the result of pattern selection is its _pattern_ value.

Reviewer: I think there might be three cases here (for the sake of clarity)

```suggestion
If the _message_ is a _simple message_,
the result of _pattern selection_ is the _message_ itself.

If the _message_ is a _complex message_
and the _message_ contains no _matcher_,
the result of _pattern selection_ is the _pattern_ value of the _message_.
```

Author: I would find it very confusing for pattern selection to result in either a _message_ or a _pattern_, esp. as we also say this: https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/aa8d29329a66a7e1399cf955a95c0b582cc1b0d5/spec/syntax.md?plain=1#L155-L156

I know that we don't require a data model in the spec, but in places like this I think it's clearer if we don't use language that isn't necessarily related to any data model concepts, such as the difference between a _simple message_ and a _complex message_.

Reviewer: I agree, but also want to make life easy on readers of our spec.

Perhaps:

> If the _message_ is a _simple message_, the entire _message_ is the _pattern_.

Author: My concerns with your proposal are that
1. As we say in Syntax that the message "contains" a pattern, we should not say here that a message "is" a pattern.
2. By the time we get here, it's almost certain that an implementation is dealing with some data model representation of the pattern, and our own data model does not distinguish between simple and complex messages; both `foo` and `{{foo}}` map to the same construct. Therefore, adding even a reference to _simple message_ is really close to establishing a need for us to add that information to the data model, which we've managed to avoid so far.

Reviewer: Fair enough

and a U+007D RIGHT CURLY BRACKET `}`.

> For example,
> a _message_ that is not _well-formed_ would format to a string as `{�}`,

> > if no fallback string is defined in the _formatting context_.

Reviewer: Nit.

```suggestion
> unless a fallback string is defined in the _formatting context_,
> in which case that string would be used instead.
```
